.. _zendservice.twitter:

ZendService\Twitter
====================

.. _zendservice.twitter.introduction:

Introduction
------------

``ZendService\Twitter`` provides a client for the `Twitter RESTAPI`_. ``ZendService\Twitter`` allows you to query
the public timeline. If you provide a username and OAuth details for Twitter, it will allow you to get and update
your status, reply to friends, direct message friends, mark tweets as favorite, and much more.

``ZendService\Twitter`` implements a *REST* service, and all methods return an instance of
``Zend\Rest\Client\Result``.

``ZendService\Twitter`` is broken up into subsections so you can easily identify which type of call is being
requested.

- *account* makes sure that your account credentials are valid, checks your *API* rate limit, and ends the current
  session for the authenticated user.

- *status* retrieves the public and user timelines and shows, updates, destroys, and retrieves replies for the
  authenticated user.

- *user* retrieves friends and followers for the authenticated user and returns extended information about a passed
  user.

- *directMessage* retrieves the authenticated user's received direct messages, deletes direct messages, and sends
  new direct messages.

- *friendship* creates and removes friendships for the authenticated user.

- *favorite* lists, creates, and removes favorite tweets.

- *block* blocks and unblocks users from following you.

.. _zendservice.twitter.authentication:

Authentication
--------------

With the exception of fetching the public timeline, ``ZendService\Twitter`` requires authentication as a valid
user. This is achieved using the OAuth authentication protocol. OAuth is the only supported authentication mode for
Twitter as of August 2010. The OAuth implementation used by ``ZendService\Twitter`` is ``ZendOAuth``.

.. _zendservice.twitter.authentication.example:

.. rubric:: Creating the Twitter Class

``ZendService\Twitter`` must authorize itself, on behalf of a user, before use with the Twitter API (except for
public timeline). This must be accomplished using OAuth since Twitter has disabled it's basic HTTP authentication
as of August 2010.

There are two options to establishing authorization. The first is to implement the workflow of ``ZendOAuth`` via
``ZendService\Twitter`` which proxies to an internal ``ZendOAuth\Consumer`` object. Please refer to the
``ZendOAuth`` documentation for a full example of this workflow - you can call all documented
``ZendOAuth\Consumer`` methods on ``ZendService\Twitter`` including constructor options. You may also use
``ZendOAuth`` directly and only pass the resulting access token into ``ZendService\Twitter``. This is the normal
workflow once you have established a reusable access token for a particular Twitter user. The resulting OAuth
access token should be stored to a database for future use (otherwise you will need to authorize for every new
instance of ``ZendService\Twitter``). Bear in mind that authorization via OAuth results in your user being
redirected to Twitter to give their consent to the requested authorization (this is not repeated for stored access
tokens). This will require additional work (i.e. redirecting users and hosting a callback URL) over the previous
HTTP authentication mechanism where a user just needed to allow applications to store their username and password.

The following example demonstrates setting up ``ZendService\Twitter`` which is given an already established OAuth
access token. Please refer to the ``ZendOAuth`` documentation to understand the workflow involved. The access
token is a serializable object, so you may store the serialized object to a database, and unserialize it at
retrieval time before passing the objects into ``ZendService\Twitter``. The ``ZendOAuth`` documentation
demonstrates the workflow and objects involved.

.. code-block:: php
   :linenos:

   /**
    * We assume $serializedToken is the serialized token retrieved from a database
    * or even $_SESSION (if following the simple ZendOAuth documented example)
    */
   $token = unserialize($serializedToken);

   $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
       'username' => 'johndoe',
       'accessToken' => $token
   ));

   // verify user's credentials with Twitter
   $response = $twitter->account->verifyCredentials();

.. note::

   In order to authenticate with Twitter, ALL applications MUST be registered with Twitter in order to receive a
   Consumer Key and Consumer Secret to be used when authenticating with OAuth. This can not be reused across
   multiple applications - you must register each new application separately. Twitter access tokens have no expiry
   date, so storing them to a database is advised (they can, of course, be refreshed simply be repeating the OAuth
   authorization process). This can only be done while interacting with the user associated with that access token.

   The previous pre-OAuth version of ``ZendService\Twitter`` allowed passing in a username as the first parameter
   rather than within an array. This is no longer supported.

.. _zendservice.twitter.account:

Account Methods
---------------

- ``verifyCredentials()`` tests if supplied user credentials are valid with minimal overhead.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.account.verifycredentails:

  .. rubric:: Verifying credentials

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->account->verifyCredentials();

- ``endSession()`` signs users out of client-facing applications.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.account.endsession:

  .. rubric:: Sessions ending

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->account->endSession();

- ``rateLimitStatus()`` returns the remaining number of *API* requests available to the authenticating user before
  the *API* limit is reached for the current hour.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.account.ratelimitstatus:

  .. rubric:: Rating limit status

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->account->rateLimitStatus();

.. _zendservice.twitter.status:

Status Methods
--------------

- ``publicTimeline()`` returns the 20 most recent statuses from non-protected users with a custom user icon. The
  public timeline is cached by Twitter for 60 seconds.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.status.publictimeline:

  .. rubric:: Retrieving public timeline

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->status->publicTimeline();

- ``friendsTimeline()`` returns the 20 most recent statuses posted by the authenticating user and that user's
  friends.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.status.friendstimeline:

  .. rubric:: Retrieving friends timeline

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->status->friendsTimeline();

  The ``friendsTimeline()`` method accepts an array of optional parameters to modify the query.

  - *since* narrows the returned results to just those statuses created after the specified date/time (up to 24
    hours old).

  - *page* specifies which page you want to return.

- ``userTimeline()`` returns the 20 most recent statuses posted from the authenticating user.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.status.usertimeline:

  .. rubric:: Retrieving user timeline

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->status->userTimeline();

  The ``userTimeline()`` method accepts an array of optional parameters to modify the query.

  - *id* specifies the ID or screen name of the user for whom to return the friends_timeline.

  - *since* narrows the returned results to just those statuses created after the specified date/time (up to 24
    hours old).

  - *page* specifies which page you want to return.

  - *count* specifies the number of statuses to retrieve. May not be greater than 200.

- ``show()`` returns a single status, specified by the *id* parameter below. The status' author will be returned
  inline.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.status.show:

  .. rubric:: Showing user status

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->status->show(1234);

- ``update()`` updates the authenticating user's status. This method requires that you pass in the status update
  that you want to post to Twitter.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.status.update:

  .. rubric:: Updating user status

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->status->update('My Great Tweet');

  The ``update()`` method accepts a second additional parameter.

  - *in_reply_to_status_id* specifies the ID of an existing status that the status to be posted is in reply to.

- ``replies()`` returns the 20 most recent @replies (status updates prefixed with @username) for the authenticating
  user.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.status.replies:

  .. rubric:: Showing user replies

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->status->replies();

  The ``replies()`` method accepts an array of optional parameters to modify the query.

  - *since* narrows the returned results to just those statuses created after the specified date/time (up to 24
    hours old).

  - *page* specifies which page you want to return.

  - *since_id* returns only statuses with an ID greater than (that is, more recent than) the specified ID.

- ``destroy()`` destroys the status specified by the required *id* parameter.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.status.destroy:

  .. rubric:: Deleting user status

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->status->destroy(12345);

.. _zendservice.twitter.user:

User Methods
------------

- ``friends()``\ r eturns up to 100 of the authenticating user's friends who have most recently updated, each with
  current status inline.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.user.friends:

  .. rubric:: Retrieving user friends

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->user->friends();

  The ``friends()`` method accepts an array of optional parameters to modify the query.

  - *id* specifies the ID or screen name of the user for whom to return a list of friends.

  - *since* narrows the returned results to just those statuses created after the specified date/time (up to 24
    hours old).

  - *page* specifies which page you want to return.

- ``followers()`` returns the authenticating user's followers, each with current status inline.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.user.followers:

  .. rubric:: Retrieving user followers

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->user->followers();

  The ``followers()`` method accepts an array of optional parameters to modify the query.

  - *id* specifies the ID or screen name of the user for whom to return a list of followers.

  - *page* specifies which page you want to return.

- ``show()`` returns extended information of a given user, specified by ID or screen name as per the required *id*
  parameter below.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.user.show:

  .. rubric:: Showing user informations

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->user->show('myfriend');

.. _zendservice.twitter.directmessage:

Direct Message Methods
----------------------

- ``messages()`` returns a list of the 20 most recent direct messages sent to the authenticating user.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.directmessage.messages:

  .. rubric:: Retrieving recent direct messages received

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->directMessage->messages();

  The ``message()`` method accepts an array of optional parameters to modify the query.

  - *since_id* returns only direct messages with an ID greater than (that is, more recent than) the specified ID.

  - *since* narrows the returned results to just those statuses created after the specified date/time (up to 24
    hours old).

  - *page* specifies which page you want to return.

- ``sent()`` returns a list of the 20 most recent direct messages sent by the authenticating user.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.directmessage.sent:

  .. rubric:: Retrieving recent direct messages sent

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->directMessage->sent();

  The ``sent()`` method accepts an array of optional parameters to modify the query.

  - *since_id* returns only direct messages with an ID greater than (that is, more recent than) the specified ID.

  - *since* narrows the returned results to just those statuses created after the specified date/time (up to 24
    hours old).

  - *page* specifies which page you want to return.

- ``new()`` sends a new direct message to the specified user from the authenticating user. Requires both the user
  and text parameters below.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.directmessage.new:

  .. rubric:: Sending direct message

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->directMessage->new('myfriend', 'mymessage');

- ``destroy()`` destroys the direct message specified in the required *id* parameter. The authenticating user must
  be the recipient of the specified direct message.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.directmessage.destroy:

  .. rubric:: Deleting direct message

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->directMessage->destroy(123548);

.. _zendservice.twitter.friendship:

Friendship Methods
------------------

- ``create()`` befriends the user specified in the *id* parameter with the authenticating user.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.friendship.create:

  .. rubric:: Creating friend

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->friendship->create('mynewfriend');

- ``destroy()`` discontinues friendship with the user specified in the *id* parameter and the authenticating user.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.friendship.destroy:

  .. rubric:: Deleting friend

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->friendship->destroy('myoldfriend');

- ``exists()`` tests if a friendship exists between the user specified in the *id* parameter and the authenticating
  user.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.friendship.exists:

  .. rubric:: Checking friend existence

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->friendship->exists('myfriend');

.. _zendservice.twitter.favorite:

Favorite Methods
----------------

- ``favorites()`` returns the 20 most recent favorite statuses for the authenticating user or user specified by the
  *id* parameter.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.favorite.favorites:

  .. rubric:: Retrieving favorites

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->favorite->favorites();

  The ``favorites()`` method accepts an array of optional parameters to modify the query.

  - *id* specifies the ID or screen name of the user for whom to request a list of favorite statuses.

  - *page* specifies which page you want to return.

- ``create()`` favorites the status specified in the *id* parameter as the authenticating user.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.favorite.create:

  .. rubric:: Creating favorites

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->favorite->create(12351);

- ``destroy()`` un-favorites the status specified in the *id* parameter as the authenticating user.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.favorite.destroy:

  .. rubric:: Deleting favorites

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->favorite->destroy(12351);

.. _zendservice.twitter.block:

Block Methods
-------------

- ``exists()`` checks if the authenticating user is blocking a target user and can optionally return the blocked
  user's object if a block does exists.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.block.exists:

  .. rubric:: Checking if block exists

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));

     // returns true or false
     $response = $twitter->block->exists('blockeduser');

     // returns the blocked user's info if the user is blocked
     $response2 = $twitter->block->exists('blockeduser', true);

  The ``favorites()`` method accepts a second optional parameter.

  - *returnResult* specifies whether or not return the user object instead of just ``TRUE`` or ``FALSE``.

- ``create()`` blocks the user specified in the *id* parameter as the authenticating user and destroys a friendship
  to the blocked user if one exists. Returns the blocked user in the requested format when successful.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.block.create:

  .. rubric:: Blocking a user

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->block->create('usertoblock);

- ``destroy()`` un-blocks the user specified in the *id* parameter for the authenticating user. Returns the
  un-blocked user in the requested format when successful.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.block.destroy:

  .. rubric:: Removing a block

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));
     $response   = $twitter->block->destroy('blockeduser');

- ``blocking()`` returns an array of user objects that the authenticating user is blocking.

  .. _zendservice.twitter.block.blocking:

  .. rubric:: Who are you blocking

  .. code-block:: php
     :linenos:

     $twitter = new ZendService\Twitter(array(
         'username' => 'johndoe',
         'accessToken' => $token
     ));

     // return the full user list from the first page
     $response = $twitter->block->blocking();

     // return an array of numeric user IDs from the second page
     $response2 = $twitter->block->blocking(2, true);

  The ``favorites()`` method accepts two optional parameters.

  - *page* specifies which page ou want to return. A single page contains 20 IDs.

  - *returnUserIds* specifies whether to return an array of numeric user IDs the authenticating user is blocking
    instead of an array of user objects.

.. include:: zendservice.twitter.search.rst


.. _`Twitter RESTAPI`: http://apiwiki.twitter.com/Twitter-API-Documentation
