.. _zend.feed.pubsubhubbub.introduction:

Zend\\Feed\\PubSubHubbub
======================

``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub`` is an implementation of the PubSubHubbub Core 0.2 Specification (Working Draft). It
offers implementations of a Pubsubhubbub Publisher and Subscriber suited to Zend Framework and other *PHP*
applications.

.. _zend.feed.pubsubhubbub.what.is.pubsubhubbub:

What is PubSubHubbub?
---------------------

Pubsubhubbub is an open, simple web-scale pubsub protocol. A common use case to enable blogs (Publishers) to "push"
updates from their *RSS* or Atom feeds (Topics) to end Subscribers. These Subscribers will have subscribed to the
blog's *RSS* or Atom feed via a Hub, a central server which is notified of any updates by the Publisher and which
then distributes these updates to all Subscribers. Any feed may advertise that it supports one or more Hubs using
an Atom namespaced link element with a rel attribute of "hub".

Pubsubhubbub has garnered attention because it is a pubsub protocol which is easy to implement and which operates
over *HTTP*. Its philosophy is to replace the traditional model where blog feeds have been polled at regular
intervals to detect and retrieve updates. Depending on the frequency of polling, this can take a lot of time to
propagate updates to interested parties from planet aggregators to desktop readers. With a pubsub system in place,
updates are not simply polled by Subscribers, they are pushed to Subscribers, elimenating any delay. For this
reason, Pubsubhubbub forms part of what has been dubbed the real-time web.

The protocol does not exist in isolation. Pubsub systems have been around for a while, such as the familiar Jabber
Publish-Subscribe protocol, *XEP-0060*, or the less well known rssCloud (described in 2001). However these have not
achieved widespread adoption typically due to either their complexity, poor timing or lack of suitability for web
applications. rssCloud, which was recently revived as a response to the appearance of Pubsubhubbub, has also seen
its usage increase significantly though it lacks a formal specification and currently does not support Atom 1.0
feeds.

Perhaps surprisingly given its relative early age, Pubsubhubbub is already in use including in Google Reader,
Feedburner, and there are plugins available for Wordpress blogs.

.. _zend.feed.pubsubhubbub.architecture:

Architecture
------------

``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub`` implements two sides of the Pubsubhubbub 0.2 Specification: a Publisher and a
Subscriber. It does not currently implement a Hub Server though this is in progress for a future Zend Framework
release.

A Publisher is responsible for notifying all supported Hubs (many can be supported to add redundancy to the system)
of any updates to its feeds, whether they be Atom or *RSS* based. This is achieved by pinging the supported Hub
Servers with the *URL* of the updated feed. In Pubsubhubbub terminology, any updatable resource capable of being
subscribed to is referred to as a Topic. Once a ping is received, the Hub will request the updated feed, process it
for updated items, and forward all updates to all Subscribers subscribed to that feed.

A Subscriber is any party or application which subscribes to one or more Hubs to receive updates from a Topic
hosted by a Publisher. The Subscriber never directly communicates with the Publisher since the Hub acts as an
intermediary, accepting subscriptions and sending updates to subscribed Subscribers. The Subscriber therefore
communicates only with the Hub, either to subscribe or unsubscribe to Topics, or when it receives updates from the
Hub. This communication design ("Fat Pings") effectively removes the possibility of a "Thundering Herd" issue. This
occurs in a pubsub system where the Hub merely informs Subscribers that an update is available, prompting all
Subscribers to immediately retrieve the feed from the Publisher giving rise to a traffic spike. In Pubsubhubbub,
the Hub distributes the actual update in a "Fat Ping" so the Publisher is not subjected to any traffic spike.

``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub`` implements Pubsubhubbub Publishers and Subscribers with the classes
``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Publisher`` and ``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Subscriber``. In addition, the Subscriber
implementation may handle any feed updates forwarded from a Hub by using
``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Subscriber\Callback``. These classes, their use cases, and *API*\ s are covered in
subsequent sections.

.. _zend.feed.pubsubhubbub.zend.feed.pubsubhubbub.publisher:

Zend\\Feed\\PubSubHubbub\\Publisher
-----------------------------------

In Pubsubhubbub, the Publisher is the party who publishes a live feed and frequently updates it with new content.
This may be a blog, an aggregator, or even a web service with a public feed based *API*. In order for these updates
to be pushed to Subscribers, the Publisher must notify all of its supported Hubs that an update has occured using a
simple *HTTP* *POST* request containing the *URI* or the updated Topic (i.e the updated *RSS* or Atom feed). The
Hub will confirm receipt of the notification, fetch the updated feed, and forward any updates to any Subscribers
who have subscribed to that Hub for updates from the relevant feed.

By design, this means the Publisher has very little to do except send these Hub pings whenever its feeds change. As
a result, the Publisher implementation is extremely simple to use and requires very little work to setup and use
when feeds are updated.

``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Publisher`` implements a full Pubsubhubbub Publisher. Its setup for use is also simple,
requiring mainly that it is configured with the *URI* endpoint for all Hubs to be notified of updates, and the
*URI*\ s of all Topics to be included in the notifications.

The following example shows a Publisher notifying a collection of Hubs about updates to a pair of local *RSS* and
Atom feeds. The class retains a collection of errors which include the Hub *URL*\ s, so the notification can be
re-attempted later and/or logged if any notifications happen to fail. Each resulting error array also includes a
"response" key containing the related *HTTP* response object. In the event of any errors, it is strongly
recommended to attempt the operation for failed Hub Endpoints at least once more at a future time. This may require
the use of either a scheduled task for this purpose or a job queue though such extra steps are optional.

.. code-block:: php
   :linenos:

   $publisher = new Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Publisher;
   $publisher->addHubUrls(array(
       'http://pubsubhubbub.appspot.com/',
       'http://hubbub.example.com',
   ));
   $publisher->addUpdatedTopicUrls(array(
       'http://www.example.net/rss',
       'http://www.example.net/atom',
   ));
   $publisher->notifyAll();

   if (!$publisher->isSuccess()) {
       // check for errors
       $errors     = $publisher->getErrors();
       $failedHubs = array();
       foreach ($errors as $error) {
           $failedHubs[] = $error['hubUrl'];
       }
   }

   // reschedule notifications for the failed Hubs in $failedHubs

If you prefer having more concrete control over the Publisher, the methods ``addHubUrls()`` and
``addUpdatedTopicUrls()`` pass each array value to the singular ``addHubUrl()`` and ``addUpdatedTopicUrl()`` public
methods. There are also matching ``removeUpdatedTopicUrl()`` and ``removeHubUrl()`` methods.

You can also skip setting Hub *URI*\ s, and notify each in turn using the ``notifyHub()`` method which accepts the
*URI* of a Hub endpoint as its only argument.

There are no other tasks to cover. The Publisher implementation is very simple since most of the feed processing
and distribution is handled by the selected Hubs. It is however important to detect errors and reschedule
notifications as soon as possible (with a reasonable maximum number of retries) to ensure notifications reach all
Subscribers. In many cases as a final alternative, Hubs may frequently poll your feeds to offer some additional
tolerance for failures both in terms of their own temporary downtime or Publisher errors or downtime.

.. _zend.feed.pubsubhubbub.zend.feed.pubsubhubbub.subscriber:

Zend\\Feed\\PubSubHubbub\\Subscriber
---------------------------------

In Pubsubhubbub, the Subscriber is the party who wishes to receive updates to any Topic (*RSS* or Atom feed). They
achieve this by subscribing to one or more of the Hubs advertised by that Topic, usually as a set of one or more
Atom 1.0 links with a rel attribute of "hub". The Hub from that point forward will send an Atom or *RSS* feed
containing all updates to that Subscriber's Callback *URL* when it receives an update notification from the
Publisher. In this way, the Subscriber need never actually visit the original feed (though it's still recommended
at some level to ensure updates are retrieved if ever a Hub goes offline). All subscription requests must contain
the *URI* of the Topic being subscribed and a Callback *URL* which the Hub will use to confirm the subscription and
to forward updates.

The Subsciber therefore has two roles. To create and manage subscriptions, including subscribing for new Topics
with a Hub, unsubscribing (if necessary), and periodically renewing subscriptions since they may have a limited
validity as set by the Hub. This is handled by ``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Subscriber``.

The second role is to accept updates sent by a Hub to the Subscriber's Callback *URL*, i.e. the *URI* the
Subscriber has assigned to handle updates. The Callback *URL* also handles events where the Hub contacts the
Subscriber to confirm all subscriptions and unsubscriptions. This is handled by using an instance of
``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Subscriber\Callback`` when the Callback *URL* is accessed.

.. important::

   ``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Subscriber`` implements the Pubsubhubbub 0.2 Specification. As this is a new
   specification version not all Hubs currently implement it. The new specification allows the Callback *URL* to
   include a query string which is used by this class, but not supported by all Hubs. In the interests of
   maximising compatibility it is therefore recommended that the query string component of the Subscriber Callback
   *URI* be presented as a path element, i.e. recognised as a parameter in the route associated with the Callback
   *URI* and used by the application's Router.

.. _zend.feed.pubsubhubbub.zend.feed.pubsubhubbub.subscriber.subscribing.and.unsubscribing:

Subscribing and Unsubscribing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Subscriber`` implements a full Pubsubhubbub Subscriber capable of subscribing to, or
unsubscribing from, any Topic via any Hub advertised by that Topic. It operates in conjunction with
``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Subscriber\Callback`` which accepts requests from a Hub to confirm all subscription or
unsubscription attempts (to prevent third-party misuse).

Any subscription (or unsubscription) requires the relevant information before proceeding, i.e. the *URI* of the
Topic (Atom or *RSS* feed) to be subscribed to for updates, and the *URI* of the endpoint for the Hub which will
handle the subscription and forwarding of the updates. The lifetime of a subscription may be determined by the Hub
but most Hubs should support automatic subscription refreshes by checking with the Subscriber. This is supported by
``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Subscriber\Callback`` and requires no other work on your part. It is still strongly
recommended that you use the Hub sourced subscription time to live (ttl) to schedule the creation of new
subscriptions (the process is identical to that for any new subscription) to refresh it with the Hub. While it
should not be necessary per se, it covers cases where a Hub may not support automatic subscription refreshing and
rules out Hub errors for additional redundancy.

With the relevant information to hand, a subscription can be attempted as demonstrated below:

.. code-block:: php
   :linenos:

   $storage = new Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Model\Subscription;

   $subscriber = new Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Subscriber;
   $subscriber->setStorage($storage);
   $subscriber->addHubUrl('http://hubbub.example.com');
   $subscriber->setTopicUrl('http://www.example.net/rss.xml');
   $subscriber->setCallbackUrl('http://www.mydomain.com/hubbub/callback');
   $subscriber->subscribeAll();

In order to store subscriptions and offer access to this data for general use, the component requires a database (a
schema is provided later in this section). By default, it is assumed the table name is "subscription" and it
utilises ``Zend\Db\Table\Abstract`` in the background meaning it will use the default adapter you have set for your
application. You may also pass a specific custom ``Zend\Db\Table\Abstract`` instance into the associated model
``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Model\Subscription``. This custom adapter may be as simple in intent as changing the table
name to use or as complex as you deem necessary.

While this Model is offered as a default ready-to-roll solution, you may create your own Model using any other
backend or database layer (e.g. Doctrine) so long as the resulting class implements the interface
``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Model\SubscriptionInterface``.

An example schema (MySQL) for a subscription table accessible by the provided model may look similar to:

.. code-block:: sql
   :linenos:

   CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS `subscription` (
     `id` varchar(32) COLLATE utf8_unicode_ci NOT NULL DEFAULT '',
     `topic_url` varchar(255) COLLATE utf8_unicode_ci DEFAULT NULL,
     `hub_url` varchar(255) COLLATE utf8_unicode_ci DEFAULT NULL,
     `created_time` datetime DEFAULT NULL,
     `lease_seconds` bigint(20) DEFAULT NULL,
     `verify_token` varchar(255) COLLATE utf8_unicode_ci DEFAULT NULL,
     `secret` varchar(255) COLLATE utf8_unicode_ci DEFAULT NULL,
     `expiration_time` datetime DEFAULT NULL,
     `subscription_state` varchar(12) COLLATE utf8_unicode_ci DEFAULT NULL,
     PRIMARY KEY (`id`)
   ) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8 COLLATE=utf8_unicode_ci;

Behind the scenes, the Subscriber above will send a request to the Hub endpoint containing the following parameters
(based on the previous example):

.. _zend.feed.pubsubhubbub.zend.feed.pubsubhubbub.subscriber.subscribing.and.unsubscribing.table:

.. table:: Subscription request parameters

   +-----------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   |Parameter        |Value                                                                                            |Explanation                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
   +=================+=================================================================================================+=======================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================+
   |hub.callback     |http://www.mydomain.com/hubbub/callback?xhub.subscription=5536df06b5dcb966edab3a4c4d56213c16a8184|The URI used by a Hub to contact the Subscriber and either request confirmation of a (un)subscription request or send updates from subscribed feeds. The appended query string contains a custom parameter (hence the xhub designation). It is a query string parameter preserved by the Hub and resent with all Subscriber requests. Its purpose is to allow the Subscriber to identify and look up the subscription associated with any Hub request in a backend storage medium. This is a non=standard parameter used by this component in preference to encoding a subscription key in the URI path which is more difficult to implement in a Zend Framework application. Nevertheless, since not all Hubs support query string parameters, we still strongly recommend adding the subscription key as a path component in the form http://www.mydomain.com/hubbub/callback/5536df06b5dcb966edab3a4c4d56213c16a8184. To accomplish this, it requires defining a route capable of parsing out the final value of the key and then retrieving the value and passing it to the Subscriber Callback object. The value would be passed into the method Zend\PubSubHubbub\Subscriber\Callback::setSubscriptionKey(). A detailed example is offered later.|
   +-----------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   |hub.lease_seconds|2592000                                                                                          |The number of seconds for which the Subscriber would like a new subscription to remain valid for (i.e. a TTL). Hubs may enforce their own maximum subscription period. All subscriptions should be renewed by simply re-subscribing before the subscription period ends to ensure continuity of updates. Hubs should additionally attempt to automatically refresh subscriptions before they expire by contacting Subscribers (handled automatically by the Callback class).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
   +-----------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   |hub.mode         |subscribe                                                                                        |Simple value indicating this is a subscription request. Unsubscription requests would use the "unsubscribe" value.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
   +-----------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   |hub.topic        |http://www.example.net/rss.xml                                                                   |The URI of the topic (i.e. Atom or RSS feed) which the Subscriber wishes to subscribe to for updates.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
   +-----------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   |hub.verify       |sync                                                                                             |Indicates to the Hub the preferred mode of verifying subscriptions or unsubscriptions. It is repeated twice in order of preference. Technically this component does not distinguish between the two modes and treats both equally.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
   +-----------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   |hub.verify       |async                                                                                            |Indicates to the Hub the preferred mode of verifying subscriptions or unsubscriptions. It is repeated twice in order of preference. Technically this component does not distinguish between the two modes and treats both equally.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
   +-----------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   |hub.verify_token |3065919804abcaa7212ae89.879827871253878386                                                       |A verification token returned to the Subscriber by the Hub when it is confirming a subscription or unsubscription. Offers a measure of reliance that the confirmation request originates from the correct Hub to prevent misuse.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
   +-----------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

You can modify several of these parameters to indicate a different preference. For example, you can set a different
lease seconds value using ``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Subscriber::setLeaseSeconds()`` or show a preference for the async
verify mode by using ``setPreferredVerificationMode(Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\PubSubHubbub::VERIFICATION_MODE_ASYNC)``.
However the Hubs retain the capability to enforce their own preferences and for this reason the component is 
deliberately designed to work across almost any set of options with minimum end-user configuration required. 
Conventions are great when they work!

.. note::

   While Hubs may require the use of a specific verification mode (both are supported by ``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub``),
   you may indicate a specific preference using the ``setPreferredVerificationMode()`` method. In "sync"
   (synchronous) mode, the Hub attempts to confirm a subscription as soon as it is received, and before responding
   to the subscription request. In "async" (asynchronous) mode, the Hub will return a response to the subscription
   request immediately, and its verification request may occur at a later time. Since ``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub``
   implements the Subscriber verification role as a separate callback class and requires the use of a backend
   storage medium, it actually supports both transparently though in terms of end-user performance, asynchronous
   verification is very much preferred to eliminate the impact of a poorly performing Hub tying up end-user server
   resources and connections for too long.

Unsubscribing from a Topic follows the exact same pattern as the previous example, with the exception that we
should call ``unsubscribeAll()`` instead. The parameters included are identical to a subscription request with the
exception that "``hub.mode``" is set to "unsubscribe".

By default, a new instance of ``Zend\PubSubHubbub\Subscriber`` will attempt to use a database backed storage medium
which defaults to using the default ``Zend\Db`` adapter with a table name of "subscription". It is recommended to
set a custom storage solution where these defaults are not apt either by passing in a new Model supporting the
required interface or by passing a new instance of ``Zend\Db\Table\Abstract`` to the default Model's constructor to
change the used table name.

.. _zend.feed.pubsubhubbub.zend.feed.pubsubhubbub.subscriber.handling.hub.callbacks:

Handling Subscriber Callbacks
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Whenever a subscription or unsubscription request is made, the Hub must verify the request by forwarding a new
verification request to the Callback *URL* set in the subscription or unsubscription parameters. To handle these
Hub requests, which will include all future communications containing Topic (feed) updates, the Callback *URL*
should trigger the execution of an instance of ``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Subscriber\Callback`` to handle the request.

The Callback class should be configured to use the same storage medium as the Subscriber class. Using it is quite
simple since most of its work is performed internally.

.. code-block:: php
   :linenos:

   $storage = new Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Model\Subscription;
   $callback = new Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Subscriber\Callback;
   $callback->setStorage($storage);
   $callback->handle();
   $callback->sendResponse();

   /**
    * Check if the callback resulting in the receipt of a feed update.
    * Otherwise it was either a (un)sub verification request or invalid request.
    * Typically we need do nothing other than add feed update handling - the rest
    * is handled internally by the class.
    */
   if ($callback->hasFeedUpdate()) {
       $feedString = $callback->getFeedUpdate();
       /**
        *  Process the feed update asynchronously to avoid a Hub timeout.
        */
   }

.. note::

   It should be noted that ``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Subscriber\Callback`` may independently parse any incoming
   query string and other parameters. This is necessary since *PHP* alters the structure and keys of a query string
   when it is parsed into the ``$_GET`` or ``$_POST`` superglobals. For example, all duplicate keys are ignored and
   periods are converted to underscores. Pubsubhubbub features both of these in the query strings it generates.

.. important::

   It is essential that developers recognise that Hubs are only concerned with sending requests and receiving a
   response which verifies its receipt. If a feed update is received, it should never be processed on the spot
   since this leaves the Hub waiting for a response. Rather, any processing should be offloaded to another process
   or deferred until after a response has been returned to the Hub. One symptom of a failure to promptly complete
   Hub requests is that a Hub may continue to attempt delivery of the update or verification request leading to
   duplicated update attempts being processed by the Subscriber. This appears problematic - but in reality a Hub
   may apply a timeout of just a few seconds, and if no response is received within that time it may disconnect
   (assuming a delivery failure) and retry later. Note that Hubs are expected to distribute vast volumes of updates
   so their resources are stretched - please do process feeds asynchronously (e.g. in a separate process or a job
   queue or even a cron scheduled task) as much as possible.

.. _zend.feed.pubsubhubbub.zend.feed.pubsubhubbub.subscriber.setting.up.and.using.a.callback.url.route:

Setting Up And Using A Callback URL Route
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As noted earlier, the ``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Subscriber\Callback`` class receives the combined key associated
with any subscription from the Hub via one of two methods. The technically preferred method is to add this key to
the Callback *URL* employed by the Hub in all future requests using a query string parameter with the key
"xhub.subscription". However, for historical reasons, primarily that this was not supported in Pubsubhubbub 0.1 (it
was recently added in 0.2 only), it is strongly recommended to use the most compatible means of adding this key to
the Callback *URL* by appending it to the *URL*'s path.

Thus the *URL* http://www.example.com/callback?xhub.subscription=key would become
http://www.example.com/callback/key.

Since the query string method is the default in anticipation of a greater level of future support for the full 0.2
specification, this requires some additional work to implement.

The first step to make the ``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Subscriber\Callback`` class aware of the path contained
subscription key. It's manually injected therefore since it also requires manually defining a route for this
purpose. This is achieved simply by called the method
``Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Subscriber\Callback::setSubscriptionKey()`` with the parameter being the key value
available from the Router. The example below demonstrates this using a Zend Framework controller.

.. code-block:: php
   :linenos:

   use Zend\Mvc\Controller\AbstractActionController;

   class CallbackController extends AbstractActionController
   {

       public function indexAction()
       {
           $storage = new Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Model\Subscription;
           $callback = new Zend\Feed\PubSubHubbub\Subscriber\Callback;
           $callback->setStorage($storage);
           /**
            * Inject subscription key parsing from URL path using
            * a parameter from Router.
            */
           $subscriptionKey = $this->params()->fromRoute('subkey');
           $callback->setSubscriptionKey($subscriptionKey);
           $callback->handle();
           $callback->sendResponse();

           /**
            * Check if the callback resulting in the receipt of a feed update.
            * Otherwise it was either a (un)sub verification request or invalid
            * request. Typically we need do nothing other than add feed update
            * handling - the rest is handled internally by the class.
            */
           if ($callback->hasFeedUpdate()) {
               $feedString = $callback->getFeedUpdate();
               /**
                *  Process the feed update asynchronously to avoid a Hub timeout.
                */
           }
       }

   }

Actually adding the route which would map the path-appended key to a parameter for retrieval from a controller can
be accomplished using a Route like in the example below.

.. code-block:: php
   :linenos:

   // Callback Route to enable appending a PuSH Subscription's lookup key
   $route = Zend\Mvc\Router\Http\Segment::factory(array(
      'route' => '/callback/:subkey',
      'constraints' => array(
         'subkey' => '[a-z0-9]+'
      ),
      'defaults' => array(
         'controller' => 'application-index',
         'action' => 'index'
      )
   ));

